	Earthly Virtue: Machiavelli's Attempt to Preserve Ancient Values

"Considering thus how much honor is awarded to antiquity, and how many times—letting pass infinite other examples—a fragment of an ancient statue has been bought at a high price because someone wants to have it near oneself, to honor his house with it, and to be able to have it imitated by those who delight in that art, and how the latter then strive with all industry to represent it in all their works; and seeing, on the other hand, that the most virtuous works the histories show us, which have been done by ancient kingdoms and republics, by kings, captains, citizens, legislators, and others who have labored for their fatherland, are rather admired than imitated—indeed they are so much shunned by everyone in every least thing that no sign of that ancient virtues remains with us—I can do no other than marvel and grieve." (I, Preface, 5)

	Why does Machiavelli grieve over people admiring ancient virtues but not imitating them? How is he trying to solve this loss?
	
	According to Machiavelli, ancient virtues have become like spiderman is to kids: something which is made to look at but not imitate. Most children admire his virtues. They bring spiderman clothes to their homes and feel honored looking at the outfit. Similarly, we pay high prices for a fragment of ancient art or statues. We praise that the ancients were prideful, courageous, honor seeking, and flexible. By bringing their art home, we feel closer to the ancients. In fact, the art adorns and honors our home. Similarly, we observe and judge the ancients’ virtues. Their abilities seem exceptional. They seem so magnificent that we think they are unsurpassable or incomparable. Due to this, ancient virtues become our ideal. They are present in our imagination as unattainable virtues.
Ancient virtues often exist in the form of fairy tales, told only at night, in order to put one to sleep. One has different tasks and obligations during the day. In the daytime, one thinks about one’s moral excellence. He thinks he is supposed to love his neighbors. If his neighbor wrongs him, despite his rage towards his neighbor, he disregards the wrong done, with the hope that there is a God who will punish the wrongdoer. Thus he endures all wrongdoings. In doing so, he forgets about his earthly happiness and thinks only about celestial happiness, much unlike his ancestors.  
	This makes Machiavelli unhappy. Modern people of his time seem to have accepted these Christian teachings. But Machiavelli sees this as a big problem: we open our arms to all the suffering. This is manifested when Machiavelli writes the following:
[The prelates, l]iving still in poverty and having so much credit with people in confessions and sermons, they give them to understand that it is evil to say evil of evil, and that it is good to live under obedience to them and, if they make an error, to leave them to God to punish. So they do the worst they can because they do not fear the punishment that they do not see and do not believe. This renewal therefore, has maintained and maintains the religion. (III. 1. 211)

	For Machiavelli, religion is not God’s teaching. Rather, it is the teaching of the prelates, who do not believe in nor fear God. They do not believe in what they cannot see, moreover that it will punish them. However, they do not share this knowledge with the plebeians. Instead, they use the authority they have over people on their behalf; they create God and make plebeians believe in his existence. They assert that God punishes the evil ones and rewards the good ones. They place the highest good in humility, abjectness, and sufferings. They make them sacrifice everything they have—freedom, pride, and self-confidence. According to Machiavelli, this will make common people the slaves of tyrants. Weak people will become weaker and strong people will become stronger. By imitating the poverty of Christ and his teachings, they even make themselves appear as Gods and use Him for their own purpose. Oblivious plebeians, unaware of their scheme, follow them blindly. 
	According to Machiavelli, religion is, therefore, the scheme of the prelates. This scheme is a problem because it takes the next step towards tyranny. Machiavelli did not write Discourses on Livy for a prince to enhance his tyranny, but for republics, “who for their infinite good parts deserve to be; not those who could load me with ranks, honors, and riches but who, though unable, would wish to do so” (I. Preface. 5). He is not interested in a prince who is only concerned for his welfare. Rather, through I. 10, where he writes tyrants are worthy of reproach, and various examples provided in the book, it is clear that he is interested in republics who possess virtù and work for the welfare of Rome. 
	There are two problems according to Machiavelli in tyrannies. First, people do not imitate the ancient virtues of the kingdom, kings, citizens, and captains who worked for the freedom of their fatherland. Second, people who have been kept in servitude to tyranny forget their desire to live free. Both of these problems are the results of Christian teachings. This makes him grieve. 
We will now move to my second question: how does Machiavelli try to work past the loss? He knows that the problems are not straightforward. He knows that it won’t be an easy task, as he himself says, “as much as it is difficult and dangerous to wish to make a people free that wishes to live servilely, so much is it to wish to make a people servile that wishes to live free” (III. 8, 239). Thus, he has to take an indirect path in his enterprise to solve the problem. If he can attract people to freedom, he will be able to fix the problems at hand.
	Machiavelli’s teachings and the teachings of the religion of his time are in opposition. Book Two, Chapter 5 seems to be an important chapter for understanding how to escape servitude, as he teaches us how variation of language, plague, and natural disasters eliminate the memories of things or eliminate the prior sect or religion. It seems as if he thinks flood and plague were essential to purge the teachings of the Old Testament and to rise the New Testament teachings. During those urgent times, the times of flood and plague, people will be in continuous tumult with one another. This continuous tumult will compel them to think about their life and property. Instead of thinking about God and higher things, people will think about their life and only what is essential to them. He states his points with examples of the Christian sect, which took some modes against the Gentiles and gain victory over them, and also the Gentiles, who took different modes to win victory over the religion prior to it. It seems that there cannot be two religions at the same time; plebeians must choose one. Therefore, in order to establish Machiavelli’s own teachings, the present teachings must be vanquished, as he says, “For when a new sect—that is, a new religion—emerges, its first concern is to extinguish the old to give itself reputation” (II. 5). Therefore, he has to go to war with religious dogma in order to prevail. Still, it sounds strange to be at war with religion. How can one even think of battling with a religion? 
	Before we move forward, it seems important to understand what Machiavelli thinks of God. As he talks about conspiracy, fraud, prudence, religion, and goes against all religious teachings, it seems as if he does not believe in neither their moral teachings nor their afterlife. He thinks about morality differently. According to him, both morality and immorality have different purposes at different times. When moral values serves us in fulfilling a goal, it is crucial to be a moralist, and when immoral tasks are essential to reach a goal, one should not hold oneself to morality. All of these teachings might imply that he does not believe in God. However, it is not that easy to understand his views on God, as he talks about fortune in a variety of ways. Sometimes fortune is just an accident, bad or good, that happens to us in everyday life. But other times, he says, “For it is the duty of a good man to teach others the good that you could not work because of the malignity of the times and of fortune, so that when many are capable of it, someone of them more loved by heaven may be able to work it” (II. Preface, 125). Here, he talks about fortune as if it is a blessing one gets from a powerful God, or that one who is anointed by God will be a successful king or a captain. From this, it seems like he believes in the power of God, but not in the moral and immoral actions of the religion or divine punishment.  
	Machiavelli himself says that if one wants to overthrow one mode of governance to another, one should start corrupting it a few generations in advance, such that one does not expect to see changes in one’s own lifetime. Instead, Machiavelli wants people to take his lessons from Discourses on Livy and continue them after he dies. It is not a war where after one win, everything changes when people surrender themselves to the new kingdom. One can hardly secure one’s power over religion by winning a battle or war over a religious person or people. Religion affects us spiritually. Religion is deeply ingrained in humans, so deeply, that a physical war cannot obliterate it. Spiritual strength seems to be greater than that of bodily strength, as Christianity persuaded even the Romans, who conquered the world with their mental and physical strength.
	Machiavelli also seems to understand various reasons that lead men to have faith in a religion. He is a good observer, as he has noticed human nature thoroughly; he says, “Human appetites are insatiable, for since from nature they have the ability and the wish to desire all things and from fortune the ability to achieve few of them, there continually results from this a discontent in human minds and a disgust with the things they possess” (Book II, Preface). This human nature, that they are always discontent with themselves, and are disgusted with what they have, make them believe in the existence of something higher than themselves. This is one of the main reasons that compels humans have faith in Christianity.
	Machiavelli also notices that the fearful nature of humans make them have faith in Christianity. It is not clear whether Machiavelli thinks it is Christian teachings—the knowledge of morality, immorality, and the punishment in the afterlife—that make humans feel guilty of their actions, or if he thinks humans are naturally prone to feeling guilty, but does he say, “For whoever has a stained conscience easily believes that one speaks of him; one can hear a word said for another end, that perturbs your spirit and makes you believe it was said about your case” (III. 6). When one does immoral actions, he is guilty of it or ashamed of it. One looks for repentance. Due to this, many people forget all earthly glory and honor and start thinking about heavenly punishment. 
	This knowledge about Christianity untangles the complications Machiavelli was having about Christianity being deeply implanted in human minds. He has to be involved in this war similarly to change their thoughts. He seems to understand that it is faith that holds together all Christian dogma. We do not see God, but nevertheless, Christianity claims that we can believe in God without seeing Him. Not only that, it also says that one is blessed who has complete faith in God because God chooses to reveal himself to those of faith. Christianity demands us we have faith in two things: first, that there is a powerful, infinite, omnipotent, and just being who created us; second, that we should have faith in him because he cares about us and will provide us eternal happiness. This kind of faith does not require evidence, and it even disregards rationality, saying our reasoning is not enough to reach the truth of God. However, Machiavelli encourages us to reason everything, as he says, “since it is good to reason everything, I do not wish to omit this” (I.18). Unlike believers, who think there are things that cannot be demonstrated by reason, Machiavelli seems to suggest that everything can be understood through reason, or at least that we should only trust those things that can be.
	Hence, the first step he takes to prevail over Christianity is showing that ancient and modern times are no different through reason. He manifests that nothing has actually changed in the universe: the sun is still in the center of the universe, the Earth still revolves around the sun, and there are still the same seasons there were before. Neither nature nor we men are different than the ancient people. This way, he displays nothing has really changed since the time of the ancients. Nevertheless, things are not exactly the same. He says, “For the civil laws are nothing other than verdicts given by ancient jurists, which, reduced to order, teach our present jurists to judge. Nor is medicine other than the experiments performed by ancient physicians, on which present physicians found their judgements” (I. Preface). Maybe modern physicians practice medicine, but they do not perform the dissection of human bodies like the ancients did. We do not practice many of the practices of the ancients, but rather, we reduce their work to some form of order. It seems that Machiavelli is saying that the ancients used to think and make real judgements, and this is what is not being practiced by the people of his time. The problem is that people neither think nor reason about things on their own. Instead, they easily accept the conclusions brought down to them by others. This lack of thinking is detrimental because it is what dissociates them from the ancients. The virtues of ancient can be practiced and achieved if we believe that nothing has changed and involve ourselves in the direction of truth through reason. 
	Then he takes his next step in the pursuit of the truth—not the imagined ideal truth, but rather a practical truth. Reason starts with vision and sensation. He compels us that we open our eyes and see the nature of humans through the numerous ancient and modern people. He states that humans are easily corruptible by showing Quintus Fabius, who was easily corrupted by the malignity of Appius (I. 42). He then shows through various examples that humans are vengeful. Not only that, but in the chapter On Conspiracy, he writes: “For to be able to make open war on a prince is granted to few; to be able to conspire against them is granted to everyone” (III.6. ). It seems that he wants us to realize that nothing is more important to humans than their body and it is important to do everything possible to save one’s life and one’s fatherland.
	The final step he takes to triumph over Christianity dogma is manifesting that nothing is more glorious than earthly glory and happiness. He does this by talking about immoral actions, namely, conspiracy, corruption, and vengefulness, all as kinds of prudence or virtue. He praises one’s ability to conspire against another. He admires those captains who do not bound themselves with the idea of morality, but rather are flexible and use morality at its right time. In III.6, he writes: “This decision so made can fall to any man of whatever sort; great, small, noble, ignoble, familiar or not familiar to the prince; for it is permitted to speak to him some time, and to whomever permitted to speak it is permitted to vent his spirit” (III. 6. 220). Here, contrary to Christianity teaching, he is telling people that it is permitted to be vindictive, and in fact, it is one’s vengeful actions which make one a spirited man. Hence, by playing a game similar to that of Christianity, which is a psychological game, and by praising all the contrary beliefs, he tries to deprogram a believer and guide him into the world of earthly honor.  
